foreign
welcome to another episode of the skip
podcast uh podcast podcast dedicated to
you and your Tech Career and how to get
ahead of it today's episode focuses on
uh dense technical subject called Equity
Equity means the stock the options the
rsus that you have in your compensation
package and I think that it's one of the
hardest things to understand but one of
the most important things I chose to to
walk everyone through this subject not
because I want everyone to be experts
but I want everyone to go from beginner
to intermediate and I think it's it's
important especially these days because
evaluations of companies have changed so
much in the last year Equity is for many
of you a huge part of your compensation
and this episode really focuses on
private companies private companies have
stock prices that aren't public and as a
result it's always really hard hard to
understand how much you're actually
making and more importantly you don't
always know whether the terms that you
have are actually going to lead to
liquidity or or the ability to make
money on your stock today's episode will
focus on the basics but also the common
mistakes that people make especially
when it comes to negotiating offer
letters
vesting stock and how to manage exits
these are the areas that when I'm
talking to Executives and other folks
that I coach they come with all kinds of
questions and it's one of my most
important subjects because of the
implications around long-term
compensation now though this is a
technical subject it's really not
designed to to replace the professionals
that are in your life the lawyers the
accountants the financial managers
they're really helpful to understand
your personal situation I'm lucky to be
joined by Anthony mccusker and Linda
Galligan on this podcast they both work
at Goodwin Proctor which is a legal firm
that represents Founders
entrepreneurs Executives and obviously
lots and lots of companies and they have
all types of information around equity
and that's who I go to and they're going
to help explain this very complicated
instrument please welcome Anthony and
Linda thanks for for having us
um we're thrilled to be here with you my
name is Anthony mccusker I'm a corporate
partner at Goodwin Proctor I co-chair
our technology practice and represent
companies from
um brand new startups with a couple
Founders through public company and
everything in between
um and so sort of guiding through the
corporate transactions that occur
um you know throughout the life cycle of
a company
that's great yeah Anthony and I have
known each other for probably two too
many uh decades to to speak of but um
you know you've both represented me and
and been one of my my guides and Sherpas
is I've been navigated the tech space
and part of the reason I invited Anthony
is because he really educated me about a
lot of the the challenges around
compensation equity and actually helped
me avoid a lot of really important and
challenging mistakes I'm really
delighted to have him here
um Linda uh I'd love to get your uh
introduce yourself and also
um you know make sure that that you're
part of our conversation today thanks so
much for having us I'm Linda Galligan
I'm a partner at Goodwin I focus my
practice on Executive and employee
compensation and I work with companies
throughout their life cycle so
everything from pre-funded startups all
the way up to multinational public
companies and everything in between I'm
so glad to have you on the episode uh
because both of you have helped me so
much in my career navigating some of the
tricky situations and my hope is that
there's you know listeners out there
staring at an offer right now like let's
just take that as this starting point
and you know Equity has so many
dimensions that I think it's it's the
Thousand questions everyone's afraid to
ask
um and maybe we'll just start with the
really simple example so
someone calls me and says hey I'm
thinking about joining startup X and you
know startup X is offering me an equity
package and what they mean by that is
they've got some stock options that are
coming to them let's maybe let's call it
5 000 a year and you know they're saying
that it's going to take four years for
me to get my 20 000 stock options and
they're telling me that if all goes well
it's going to be worth 100 Grand and you
know if that's actually the case I feel
like it's a pretty reasonable offer but
the voice in the back of my head is well
is it worth a hundred thousand could it
be worth more could it be worth less
what is an option you know so maybe
today we can kind of just like pull this
apart you know between the three of us
and try to explain it so maybe I'll
start by asking you know like how what
is this stock option and how do
companies you know create this ownership
set of structures between stock and
option preferred stock
um maybe one of you could help me
understand that so you've sort of set it
up well Mikhail like the
um technology or life science or any
venture-backed startup will generally
have sort of you know three categories
of stock along its Journey preferred
stock com and stock and will have you
know sort of incentive Equity whether
that's options or some other form like
an RSU and the companies sell preferred
stock to their investors so Venture
investors Angel Investors they will
generally hold preferred stock and then
the founders when they start the
business will hold common stock and then
the employees and other advisors along
the way will receive common stock in
exchange for the options that you know
like you've you've outlined so on day
one a founder or founding team would own
100 of the company all in common stock
and then would ideally sell preferred
stock at some point fairly quickly in
its journey to Preferred investors and
you might have you know 25 or 30 percent
of the company going to some investors
in the form of preferred stock and the
balance would be in the founders with a
usually somewhere around 10 to 20
percent usually kind of 10 to 15
probably is standard of that overall
capitalization reserved for an option
pool
um and the reason that you sell
preferred stock to investors or one of
the reasons you sell preferred stock to
investors and keep common stock for
um for the team is along that private
company Journey you can actually sell
the preferred stock for like an
Enterprise Value if you will what's the
whole Enterprise worth
um and that preferred stock has rights
preferences and privileges things like
liquidation preference and voting rights
that require their approval for certain
transactions anti-dilution protection
where the common stock doesn't have
those things so the common stock can be
valued
um at a lower level you know ideally at
the time of an exit the preferred stock
converts to common stock and that's
probably more complicated than what we
need to talk about here but in kind of a
perfect world The Common and the
preferred at the time of an IPO or
certainly at the time of an IPO by the
time of an exit would be
um equal in value but early on because
of those the lack of those rights
preferences and privileges the company
has the ability to set a lower value on
that common stock so uh then there's
some tax rules that require you to go
get a a professional valuation that
would help you price those options but
you know oftentimes in early stage
startups you might have you know kind of
an 80 or eight even 85 percent discount
to that preferred stock price on the on
the common
um and then that differential will close
as the company becomes more mature gets
closer to a potential exit and on the
day of an IPO you would in perfect world
have it be no differential is what a
evaluation an expert would tell you so
the ability to price your options at you
know 20 or 15 even sometimes of what
that preferred stock value is is
allowing you to give a real incentive to
to your to your team and that's really
the the kind of
whole rationale around why you have a
comment and a preferred construct right
right no that's really helpful I mean
maybe maybe if I kind of repeat back
what I'm hearing is there's sort of two
things that are worth understanding one
is any company that's going you know has
sort of these three blocks of comp of
equity it has this preferred concept
which went to to investors that
effectively gave cash let's say in most
cases back to the company it has the
founders which has a block of stock uh
and and that's usually this kind of
common and then it has a bunch of of of
options in most cases that are given
over to the employees and so this is
sort of a piece of this sort of pie
chart that is the ownership of a company
and then the second thing you said is
that well an investor that puts in
dollars they have some rights that the
employees don't have and there's some
risk that the employees don't
necessarily get a return and that the
investors might and so that is what
causes the investor to pay a dollar and
the employee to maybe have the same
instrument that's less and it's possible
they they don't end up
getting the ownership percentage of what
they think they're going to get we'll
talk about that in a bit but I think
that the bigger point is that there's a
gap and the earlier the company the
bigger that Gap usually is between the
price that you end up having for the
options that an employee has and then
the price that an investor pays and that
price is set by a third party typically
so there's a and I think that we call
that that 409a price that I think is you
know constantly I'm sure all these folks
are hearing 409a price so that's the
price that the company the accountants
if you will go out and price the The
Entity and it's this sort of discount
against what the the maybe the investors
have paid so I know that's a little bit
complicated but it's important for us as
sort of grounding for today's
conversation of you know okay going back
to my example I'm getting this five
thousand dollars
uh sorry 5 000 shares and you know
they're telling me that it you know
every year I'll get it for four years
you know but before we go into sort of
like the value of that what Mimi Linda
this is a question for you is like what
questions do you typically want to make
sure that the employee just sort of
understands you know when they're
looking at compensation if someone if I
if I hand you this offer letter what are
you going to tell me I need to make sure
I ask about
I think just one
concept I think we should throw out
there it's kind of a basic one but just
to understand even what an option is if
you're up if your offer includes a grant
of a stock option
because I think sometimes people look at
it and think oh that's my stock That's
My Equity but an option just gives you
the right to buy that stock and that
409a price is the price you pay so
um obviously if you get into a company
really early it's going to have a very
low strike price as a company matures
and grows that strike price goes up but
that really changes the economics of
your option because if you think about
it you kind of Peg the value that you're
coming in at when you join the company
and you're going to get the appreciation
over that but you don't necessarily get
credit for the value that's created
before you join so it's kind of
important to understand the economics of
how just an option works well and then
just on that Linda can I ask a company
for like what that price is like the the
409a when I get that offer letter most
of the time I don't see that price
written down is that some is that a
valid question it is and I think that
most companies would eventually share
that information
um you know if you're being hired into
you know a senior level position it's a
certainly a valid question and something
that companies would normally share
um but again it's it's somewhat
sensitive and not something that
companies wanted to share kind of have
and have broadly distributed so once you
get down the path of negotiating offer I
think it's it's a valid question to ask
got it so that's one question what are
the other kind of questions that I want
to know so the the other thing is that
and I think you phrased this offer in a
really good way that it was explained to
the candidate as something with some
tangible kind of dollar value
because what happens sometimes is that
people may look at the share number
right like I have an option for a
thousand shares or an option for a
million shares and it's real it can be a
little bit confusing and sometimes
misleading right because your the number
of shares that you will be covered by
your option is really just what's your
slice of the pie and maybe that pie only
has you know 10 slices and maybe it's
already been sliced up into a million so
it's really it's helpful to understand
especially for an earlier Stage Company
what percentage of the equity does that
represent because at the end of the day
the Thousand you know share option could
be a greater percentage than the million
depending on the overall cap table of
the company are you be shocked by how
few people actually ask that question
right
and the question we're asking is you
know what's the price and then what
percentage
of the company is this grant
representing and I think that the
concern is that you know companies might
say Hey you know that's confidential you
know and it's you know it's a it's a
it's 20 000 options and that's what you
should think about how do you how do you
push on this point because 20 000
options might be worth a lot more than a
million options for a different company
going back to your example so how do I
make sure that I know what I'm getting
yeah so I think it it's most relevant
for an earlier Stage Company
right that still thinks about its cap
table in terms of percentages you're
talking about a public company it's
totally irrelevant and even for a later
stage private company that has a
significant valuation you know I don't
think it's helpful to know that your
Grant is you know 0.0001 of the company
right
um later stage companies tend to think
about grants more in a dollar value but
for that earlier Stage Company I do
think it's important and again if you're
being hired into a senior position it's
not a ridiculous ask to understand how
the cap table works maybe not to see the
cap table but to understand what
percentage of the company your Grant
would represent
got it and Anthony you know going back
to sort of the basics of options when
why do companies just not give stock why
do they have this this convoluted
mechanism that Linda Manson riches you
know there's a price and when you
actually get to the moment of selling
you have to factor that price in and
it's not zero and so now it's a part of
this calculation are they just trying to
be mean or what causes a company to go
from just giving stock to options in
general
yes so it's it's it's tax driven so if
you were to give someone you know in
your example 5 000 shares a year
um the value of that you know let's say
it's five thousand dollars
um they'd have income of five thousand
dollars for that year so the value of
what you gave them would be taxable
um and that's you know that might be
okay when you're really really small and
you know you're giving someone 150 150
of income or something along that line
or even maybe five thousand uh because
they own the stock and they don't pay an
exercise price they just pay taxes on
the value that they received
um that may work early but later on as
the values get real high and you're
starting to hire lots of people of at
all sorts of levels within your
organization
um that's just a tax Challenge and so
companies have you know sort of you know
long long time ago developed this
concept of we can give someone an option
that they can have the benefit to buy
that and they could do it early right
sometimes especially for senior
Executives you might be able to say
one of the things I want to negotiate
for and we can probably talk about this
later is I want to be able to exercise
even before I vest instead of vesting
like at the end of that one year that
you described and then exercising those
shares I might be able to exercise early
and then I own the shares assuming that
I continue to vest and you know perform
for that four-year period I would I
would own those shares for forever and I
would have started my long-term capital
holding period
in the U.S at least
um early on when you when you first
bought them and that's a benefit
but I could also wait besides when I
realized that there is real value in
this business yeah yeah yeah so there's
two things there I think one is that
if you didn't get options and the
company just gave you stock they're
giving you ownership of the company
every month but you're having to pay tax
and it's not liquid so you actually have
a company that theoretically the values
on paper and yet you have a tax
liability which is why companies move
off of options move to options
relatively quickly so that makes sense
and then there's this so the second
Point you're making which is
for those people that are familiar with
public company Equity typically those
are coming in without a lot of you know
ways to save money on Tax those are sort
of just coming in pretty straight I
think that if you're early into a
company and the company asks suggests to
you or even maybe as an executive you
negotiate
this early exercise I think that maybe
the the some of the listeners have heard
this 83b term that's been you know used
as part of it you're suggesting that hey
that might be wise because it really
reduces your potential tax but then you
have to take the possibility that you're
buying this stock up front for you know
and it may not be worth it so how have
you maybe how is this how do you advise
your clients around this sort of early
exercise is it important is it not you
know when when is it usually make sense
when does it not make sense
I'm happy to take that one
um and just one I'll get to that in a
sec but I just also wanted to mention
um on why options there are some who
will say I mean this is not like a legal
point but it's that it's the right
incentive right that you want people to
be incentivized to grow the value of the
company over their exercise price so
there's that that's another reason why
some companies may choose options
because they just think it aligns
everybody in growing value
um on kind of early exercise and 83b
options so
um do you want me to kind of describe
how it works or just yes I think that
would be worth because I think a lot of
people do do tend to hit this question
around you know do I really exercise and
and I I think that
um maybe we caveat it by talking about
an early stage you know that the you
know the these sort of series a series B
type settings but I think it's worth
kind of spending a few minutes on it we
see a lot of companies offer early
exercise options meaning
it's an option that can be exercised
meaning you can pay your exercise price
and convert from being an optionee to a
stockholder
even before that option is vested so you
could join the company you know on
December 1st get your option on December
2nd and exercise the whole thing that
day even though you've been an employee
for one day
um it's really a tax Play why you do
that and typically you'd only see it
with a low exercise price the benefit
let me try to describe the benefit so
when you exercise an option
that date of exercise is going to be the
first potential tax event for you
um if it's an ISO it would be
potentially AMT if it's a non-qual it
would be income tax and the tax exposure
is on the spread of the option so the
amount by which the fair market value
has exceeded the exercise price at the
time that you exercise so in anything
else so the later event with your option
could be after you've exercised you hold
chairs and you sell those shares that's
your next tax event but that's going to
be capital gain it's only really an
exercise that you have that AMT or
income tax exposure so what some people
want to do is to exercise while the
value is still low and there's maybe no
spread so that you kind of lock in a
small or no amount of income or AMT at
the time of exercise and then future
appreciation when you're able to sell
those shares if you are in the future
year will be all long-term capital gain
that that doesn't happen automatically
just by exercising an option though
that's unvested if you exercise a vested
option that's how it works but for an
unvested option
if you want that result you need to make
something called an 83b election
and the reason why you have to make an
83b election is that if you
if you don't then your option so 83b
gets its catchy name from 83b of the tax
code 83a says hey if you exercise for
unvested shares you're not text until
you vest that would be a pretty bad
result so 83b says Nope text me when I
exercise even though this is for
invested shares
so the 83b election allows you to kind
of bring that income or AMT event into
the year of exercise and then also lets
you start that capital gains holding
period for the shares so that when and
if you're able to sell those shares it
should all be you know long-term or
short-term capital gain depending on how
long you've held so it's really it's I
think there's maybe some
other you know non-legal benefits why
people may want to exercise and be an
actual shareholder as opposed to an
optionee but the main reason why people
with early exercise is because of that
potential tax benefit
um but like I said if you want to
crystallize that benefit you've got to
make the 83b election and it's
um it's a weird
filing it's like you have to go back in
a time machine to like the 1970s or
1980s because there's no electronic
filing of an 83b election it's something
you have to send in to the IRS within 30
days after you exercise an early
exercise option and there's no it's a
hard deadline there's no for a lot of
other things with the IRS you know you
can pay your taxes late and just pay
some penalties there's no like penalty
or correction it's just you Mr 83b
election and now you've missed out on
that benefit of early exercising your
options yeah and this one it's maybe it
sounds a little bit more complicated
than it is I mean my sense is that when
you are a founder and you're early into
a company and the price spread is
relatively low and the dollars are very
small like you're 80 you know you're
handed like in my example maybe you're
handed one percent of the company in
exchange for employment you're going to
get it over four years and the stock is
at micro pennies and at that stage you
know the founder as an early employee I
think almost all you know
recommendations is to go ahead and file
the 83b it's not a lot of money and what
it does is it converts these options to
essentially stock but it's unvested so
you don't actually own it but it starts
the clock and you work on these weird
you know you learn about registered mail
at the post office for the first time
and you know you send a little envelope
back and it's really really helpful full
and 83bs can actually be helpful for the
listeners out there when they receive
early advisory options too I mean the
the all of these sort of options that
exist at the beginning make sense to
sort of do this I think as the companies
start getting further along and you're
thinking about exercising the dollars or
more significant there might be a spread
because it's not the day that you
exercise might be your letter that's
when I usually suggest to people talk to
it like their actual accountant or find
someone that can advise them and the
risk is of course you're putting money
into the company but it may not work out
financially and so if you're putting and
I know there are lots of examples of
people who have done both mistakes one
is they didn't exercise their founders
stock and then they ended up paying much
higher taxes and I think you know both
of you probably have examples I have
examples of this in my career uh and
then there's examples of folks that have
exercised and then the stock plummets
and oh boy I'm not sure that that I'll
end up making my money back and it's
quite hard to recover that in terms of
loss and so those are the two two notes
around exercise but I think that
probably covers the the third point I
mean if we go back we said well let's
make sure that you understand the price
let's make sure you understand the
percentage and then let's think through
whether there's options around tax
savings particularly around early
exercise
now maybe the is there anything else
Linda that comes to mind that you'd want
to make sure that for our kind of
fictitious you know offer that you're
kind of understanding when it comes to
this option Grant I think it's just to
make sure or validate that the rest of
the terms are kind of both standard
right does most companies have a
four-year vesting period you know one
year cliff and then monthly like is that
the vesting like is it or does it have
something that's more unusual
um and then also looking at exercise
periods like when can you exercise the
option and if you decide to leave the
company and you have some vested options
how long can you exercise for so to kind
of look at some of those other option
terms to see if they're kind of standard
or if there are some things you'd want
to push back or negotiate around
let's talk about the exit case because I
think that's probably the one that comes
up you know more commonly most people
are you know in a position especially
with the market the way it is that
there's a chance that they'll leave the
company and the company won't be public
and so the challenge with options is you
have an option to buy but you know that
getting liquidity actually selling them
requires someone to buy them and that
might be through an acquisition or going
through a public offer that those are
the two common cases there are some edge
cases and in that situation
um I can imagine myself in my example
you know I've got twenty thousand
options and I'm two years in I decide
this isn't not the company for me and
then I end up leaving
and all of a sudden
I start realizing that those options
aren't like stock that I can carry with
me so can you just walk me through like
this scenario and why what happens here
sure so
if you leave
um before you vested that any unvested
options just go away automatically and
if you had early exercise them and you
were a stockholder the company would
typically repurchase it you know give
you your money back and take those
invested shares back
for an option that you haven't exercised
yet and that's bested
um normally you're going to have a short
shorter period of time to exercise that
option that's called the
post-termination exercise period and the
most common post-termination exercise
period is 90 days or three months so
um it's important to understand that
because you've had this option for a
couple of years hopefully the value of
the company has appreciated so you have
this option that's in the money but now
if you don't exercise it within three
months it's going to go away
um because of that um and maybe you know
maybe there's a barrier to coming up
with the exercise price you know if you
joined a company at a later stage and
you have you know a significant exercise
price but even if you don't maybe the
options in the money so you're going to
have a significant tax event and nobody
I know gets too jazzed about having dry
taxes on exercising an option so you may
not want to do that or you may not be
able to you may not be able to afford
the taxes so because of that sometimes
people negotiate or companies offer a
longer postermination exercise period
um there's this gets talked about a lot
um and there have been like some sort of
trends that started and then stopped or
pulled back so I I will say it's in
based on what I see most companies still
stick to that default of a 90-day
post-termination exercise period
although there are some exceptions but
it's a good thing to ask about as you're
going into a company about whether you
could get longer
um the longest you can get is up to the
original expiration date of the option
most options have a 10-year life so you
can theoretically get all the way up you
know if you stayed for two years you
could get another eight years to
exercise what's negotiated is usually
something in between that you know the
ultimate exploration and something
sooner but it is it's an it's an
important business point that you may
not be thinking about as you're going
into a company but can really
um you know be disappointing when you
leave if there are challenges to
exercising and you have a short time to
do it it yeah I mean this is the thing
that scares me the most right now with
offers is that you have relatively High
you know like take these growth
companies that have raised a fair amount
of capital and they're still hiring
let's say they're hiring at a product
and the person comes to me and says look
I've got this relatively large offer for
half percent one percent of the company
and the price that they have you know
they were a billion dollar company and
they have a pretty high 409a price
and so you know my observation is it's
going to take hundreds of thousands of
dollars to exercise those options well
it's not necessary maybe you're not
trying to save taxes and you're thinking
about the upside and so it's fine but
you know two years in and they decide to
leave then they're in this very very
awkward stage where they can't afford to
to take out the dollars and buy those
those options they might have seen an
uptick in price or perhaps even lower
but they stand if they don't exercise 90
days later which is a very common
scenario they just lose everything so
all the equity that they made they have
nothing to show for it maybe Anthony why
do companies
have a short window and why is it that
this is a tough negotiation to extend it
I've Heard lots and lots of things about
this so the 90-day period is what
governs ISO so there's two types of
options not to over complicate things
there's isos incentive stock options and
those are generally given to employees
and the tax code allows you to give
those to employees and then there's
something called a non-qualified stock
option or an NSO and those are just
generically more often given to advisors
Consultants board members who aren't
employees and then the iso rules and
isos have a beneficial tax that comes
along with them
and the iso rules provide for a 90-day
exercise period post termination and if
you were to extend that you actually are
giving them an NSO or converting their
ISO to an NSO and in foregoing the tax
benefits that
um that the tax code provides for isos
so for that reason companies sort of
default to the 90 days so they can
preserve that
um that benefit you know it's a little
off topic but like a lot of us a lot of
options never ever get that benefit
because you have to hold and
um your option and your
um stock once you exercise it for two
years I think it is Linda right so two
years from Grant and one year from
exercise and one year from exercise so a
lot of times the people are selling and
not getting that benefit anyway but
that's why you have the 90-day period
um you know and then the second question
you asked around why companies sort of
um
you know resist changing it is is one
they have to keep it in there if they
want to have that it's best to keep it
in there if you want to have the iso
preservation
um and then you know to the point Linda
was making understanding that on the way
in is key because that's probably your
point of highest leverage if you wanted
to say hey look
you know if I depart I want to have you
know something more than 90 days I want
you know up to the 10-year period from
the data Grant or I want you know a year
or two and and these negotiations tend
to be
a year or two years is where people end
up getting to
um it's not un you know it's not unheard
of but it's not super common to have the
full 10-year period and so on the way in
if you negotiated that that's probably a
place that you can get
you know some leverage on the way out
you know who knows what your Leverage is
who knows why you're leaving and there
may be you know other things that you'd
rather
have set so you can negotiate instead of
this at that time
yeah and maybe Linda this is the core
question I think my advice to people is
that
sometimes people get so fixated on the
share count hey let's make sure I get as
many share many options as possible as
part of this offer
but you know this node on there's a
chance that I can't afford it and you
know I only have 90 days and there's a
pretty good chance that the company will
be private even when I exit you know if
the company is really early and the
Market's the way it is so I almost feel
like negotiating this is very very worth
understanding and at least asking about
but in your experience both being on
both sides of the table both helping you
know
Executives as well as helping companies
is it common for companies to give on
this or to have distinct policies
depending on certain individuals and how
have you seen it is it at 10 50 or 90
chance that uh that folks are going to
be able to sort of make make a
concession here
it's really all over the place like
there are other terms that I can tell
you really easily what the market is but
this one's a little bit all over the
place because there are some
kind of competing inputs so
um
I I agree that 90 days kind of started
because it was an ISO Rule and then it
just kind of became the default and it's
what companies did for a very long time
there's
kind of the other side of that is there
is some a little bit of a benefit to a
company when someone has an ISO because
when an employee exercises an ISO a
company doesn't have to do any tax
withholding
and if you give someone if someone
exercises an option more than 90 days
after they leave then it's taxed as a
non-qual and so a company has to figure
out like how that how in the world do we
do tax withholding for this former
employee and remit taxes so could you do
that on a one-off basis sure it's hard
to do it at scale and some of the not I
mean every company's different some of
the clients that Anthony and I work with
like to kind of have standardized terms
for everybody so whether you're an
executive or you know a new hired kind
of Junior engineering person your terms
are pretty much the same and so it
doesn't feel great to some companies to
say okay well these senior people with
larger grants get a longer
post-germination exercise period but
more Junior people don't and so if we do
it for everybody then we have this kind
of administrative
headache of trying to figure out how to
do tax withholding for everybody so
there there's some trade-offs I I mean
I tend to agree that you have the most
leverage as you're coming in so it's
certainly worth asking for and there are
lots of companies that do it
um and some companies that make
exceptions for executives not so much
because they're Executives but because
they have larger grants right so the
burden of exercising is more significant
but it's it's
there's no kind of clear Trend at least
in my mind
yeah you know the only thing I'd add to
that is I I do think you're going to see
and like Linda said it's all over the
place you're also going to see
um varying degrees of sophistication
among the employers on this topic right
so you'll have people you know offerees
or you know new employees that'll ask
about it and the company just hasn't
even thought about it yet you know for
they just haven't experienced it and so
there's that that creates a challenge
too you know for your your new hire
that's you know trying to get this
because it's important to them and
people running the business haven't just
even really thought about it or had to
experience it before now let's take the
flip side let's say you know going back
to your example Anthony where you have
low leverage let's say that I'm I'm
advising an executive that calls me and
says I'm in the process of transitioning
and
um and I I see a 90-day window and and
frankly I I can't shell out the kind of
money and the tax consequences are
substantive you know kind of the
scenario that you both described
you know I I stand to lose this comp and
you know obviously it's a big portion of
why I joined and so I'm feeling really
really bad about it what what are the
what are the the you know are there any
credible options for this person you
know to sort of retain or hold on to the
the comp you know what could they ask
the company and if the company says no
what are what choices do they have you
know I do think you see a lot of I mean
you should ask right for sure and you
know you oftentimes see a lot of
CEOs or Founders that say Hey your
contribution was good I feel bad that
you know you you have this window
um it's a little self-inflicted because
you're quitting but you know I I feel
you know I feel a little bad that you're
in this position so I'm going to ask the
board to extend and Boards you know tend
to
tend to defer to the CEO on those sorts
of calls but there are people out there
that think hey this is kind of the deal
right we want these people to get us you
know through to you know kind of a the
next level of scale or through an exit
or whatever it may be and so there's
there's varying responses if the company
were to say no
um what you end up seeing people do is
try to can I get a loan you know and and
you know again you're paying if you have
AMT or tax on this you're paying not
just the exercise price but then the tax
on the difference between your exercise
price and then the current fair market
value at the time and sometimes that
number is even bigger than the exercise
price and so people sometimes try to get
loans for it
um you see sometimes people will go and
try to sell stock you know they'll try
to arrange a way for selling into a
private transaction to someone that
wants to own the stock of this business
um selling some of the stock they hold
so that they can use those proceeds to
to pay the exercise and the tax I think
those are probably the two you know when
the company says they can't accommodate
you those are probably the two things we
see most often
and then I think it's kind of like it
it's kind of basic but the other thing
that I see happen sometimes is that
people will just exercise a portion of
the option you know it's not all or
nothing you don't have to exercise it
for all the shares and sometimes there
is like you know a financial reason why
you can't or you're not comfortable
exercising the whole thing you'll at
least get some you know hold some of the
shares and hope for a great exit but
um it's not it's not an All or Nothing
proposition
when we recorded this session with
Anthony and Linda on Equity what I
realized is that there was one big set
of questions that I didn't answer and I
didn't really talk about which was this
instrument called private rsus and so in
the last few years a bunch of companies
have gotten to unicorn status and
employees actually don't get options or
they don't get restricted stock so they
can't file 83b uh they they work
differently than uh the options and some
of the information that we shared here
so I just wanted to add this information
uh into our discussion so private rsus
was designed to have some of the best
aspects of stock and options so imagine
a situation where you receive twenty
thousand rsus and rsus you should think
about just like stock they work like
stock and that they vest over a same
period of time like hey four years at 20
000 shares will go over four years you
get five thousand every year and maybe
broken into monthly increments when you
leave the company if the company's
liquid you could actually sell them for
whatever the price is and you don't have
to pay for the option it's there's no
strike price there is no foreign on a
price in the same way and so you know
what the company usually does is says
well we're we believe our RSU price is
five dollars and we think we're going to
give you a hundred thousand dollars
worth of of stock and that's going to
translate five times twenty thousand
rsus is hundred thousand dollars and you
know the nice thing is that if the
company went to 10 you made uh you know
a little bit more and if the company's
stock went down even you know unlike
options where you're underwater because
you have to buy them you don't have to
buy them so you might make a little less
but at least you make some money on your
Equity so this is a great instrument and
what's interesting is the IRS actually
allows you to vest these without paying
tax and the reason why is that you know
technically you're not receiving the
stock until you get to exit and so what
that means is you know if the company
goes public they'll go in and they'll
say well two years ago we gave you a
grand and two years later you the
company went public or got sold here
we'll give you half now on one day and
then they take all the taxes and so it's
not great to save taxes which is why a
lot of companies stick with options and
they're kind of a pain to administer so
a lot of companies just don't want to do
the overhead but the advantage is that
you don't have to pay taxes as you're
vesting so it has that aspect like
options are great because you can keep
getting equity in monthly vesting and
you don't pay taxes but it's kind of
like you own a stock and for most cases
this is this is just a positive
instrument so I really like receiving
private rsus especially when the company
had a really high stock price and they
were really valuable now the two gotchas
that I just want to flag for for the
listeners out there is one gotcha is
that let's say someone comes along and
an investor and says they want to buy
some of the
um they want to invest in the company
and they're willing to take common stock
well the advantage of that and we've
talked a little bit about this in the
episode is you know that investor can
can actually take some of the options
that that employees have and you know
the employee can exercise it and they
can turn it around and sell it to this
new investor and the investor gets
common stock and you know the company
employees actually have liquidity well
before it goes public and this is great
this is this secondary Market sale can
be really helpful and we talked about it
also can be helpful in securing equity
on exit if you had to grab it before the
options expire but can't do that with
rsus rsus as we said don't really become
Equity until you get to an exit event
not just uh an event where someone's
willing to pay so you can't really
transfer rsus so that's one thing to
worry about if you have a choice between
these instruments
um and then the second and the more
concerning is a bit of an obscure thing
that I came across which which is you
know like any instrument rsus expire and
you know that means that let's say seven
years from the day that you start with a
company those rsus will end up
terminating meaning that they will if
they don't if they're not public or
you're not sold by that they'll zero
them out company can't do anything about
that
and so this expiration applies whether
you're a current employee or you've left
the company so imagine a scenario where
you've joined a company worked there for
three years you leave well it's amazing
is the rsus don't expire until seven so
you've got four more years unlike
options you don't have to negotiate a
window but boy if that company doesn't
go public you're in trouble you've lost
all of that equity and you can't do much
about it and the reason why is because
the IRS feels like well you're not we're
not getting when you're vesting we're
not getting any tax and since we're not
getting any tax there has to be some
risk of forfeiture there has to be some
reason and what you as employees say is
look there's a possibility in seven
years I don't even get my money and so
the IRS says okay got it we'll wait
until we collect taxes when the company
goes public but seven years from now it
also may maybe eliminated and that
that's enough to sort of survive the IRS
test so make sure if you're looking at
private RSU use in your offer that you
think about the fact that you know
you're you're not going to be able to
sell to a to another investor during the
time until the company goes public and
there is a chance that you could lose it
after seven years or whatever the term
is on expiration
so I just want to make sure that we
introduce that before we exit this
episode okay back to the episode so this
is one of the things that you both have
taught me about is when is the right
time to ask some of these questions is
really important and I think that
um you you know when the relationships
are right at the beginning and
everyone's excited you have just more
opportunity to just say hey if things
don't work out you know in my situation
maybe it's worth looking at you know
working through those rainy day
scenarios and companies might be more
more interested in doing that than if
things are at a position where you're
leaving and they want you to retain or
maybe things didn't work out and they're
in the process of of of working through
a termination and I also think that you
know sometimes I I've I've certainly
when I've been in this situation and
I've been on the other side of the table
advising there's a lot of people that
are like oh it's terrible that the
company has decided you're no longer the
right person for of the gig you should
lawyer up and you should really go to
town and really like fight him tooth and
nail because you know this feels like
this is an unfair situation on exit but
at the same time you know when you're
describing this sort of well maybe the
CEO is going to be kind to you maybe the
board is willing to do things you you
sort of need a little bit of good
weather and some luck because you don't
always have leverage and so maybe this
is a generic question Linda but when
people come to you and they say the
company walked me out the door today
where they've decided I no longer can
work there because the company is
restructuring or maybe the CEO doesn't
like me or whatever the situation is
your recommendation you know what tools
do they have and how do you suggest they
go about that discussion it kind of
depends on what the circumstances are
like I most of our I feel like our
clients are good actors right so people
come and go and there's no kind of ill
will
um I think if an executive came to me
with that scenario I'd make sure you
know that they feel like they were
treated overall fairly during their
tenure at the company and then I agree
that
um exit negotiations tend to go
smoothest when you work out the economic
pieces in a really collaborative way
um any company I think
reacts a little bit differently when you
have your lawyer approach them because
then it's like whoa like what you know
what what's happening here
um and they of course want to then
protect the company you know and like
focus on
um just you know negotiating a quick
exit
um I think if you you know again if you
feel like overall you were barely
treated at the company it's best just to
have a conversation and lay it out like
lay out what's important to you because
it's not you know your circumstances may
be different
um you know some people don't have
challenges with exercising you may have
an event coming up in your life where
you know hey I it's gonna be easy for me
to exercise six months from now can I
just get a little more time and just
kind of lay it out there so that you can
come up with hopefully a result that
works for both you and the company
yeah and that's been my experience too I
know maybe because of some of the
coaching and coaxing that the firm has
suggested is that I've always felt like
now looking back you know in the rear
view mirror that I've always gotten a
better outcome when I've been focused on
collaboration and accepting that you
know where you have leverage where you
don't and and you know employment
situations are at will and they they go
for a few years and it's really common
for chemistry fit to not work out and I
think that the hard part for for people
is to realize that you always assume
that your employment is based on your
competence and then you're like well no
no I'm competent and you don't see me
but the reality is that it also
especially as you get more seniors based
on fit and need and your competence may
you may be incredibly successful at your
next and previous prop world but you
know it's not necessarily the time to
fight and and that I think is is
important piece that you know I think
that there's stories of people that go
to town that tend to get a lot of press
and then the 90 percent of people that
get better off when they when they work
on the same side of the table I think
that is again it's like not a legal
thing it's kind of how do you get your
head around this transition that you may
not have planned
um and it's
it it's funny like it's often like the
it's not you it's me but like a lot of
times that's that's the case and I I
think I've mentioned to you that I
um have a sister who's a marketing
professional and she works with
technology companies so she moves around
a lot right I think certain roles
product people right tend to you know as
companies change strategy sometimes
people just move on and it's just
understanding that you know it's again
it has nothing to do with your
competence companies just going in a
different
direction and you can land someplace
else really great absolutely what I'd
love to understand maybe in you know as
we kind of think through the final ends
of this this podcast is less about
someone looking at a new offer
more about someone who's entering the
new year a little bit worried about
their current offer
you know if you're in a public company
it's pretty obvious when you look out
and you see the stock price and it's you
know the Market's taking a hit this past
year
um you know kind of where you stand
you know exactly how much you stand to
earn and maybe perhaps how much you
thought you were going to earn when you
joined or as you've been investing
but it's a lot harder to understand that
in privately held companies and you can
kind of guess that you know the Market's
not quite as strong as it was and you
might maybe look at a public company in
your sector and see it's down 70 80
percent but you know companies are
making offers to new employees at their
past prices employees are told that you
know just hold it out the Market's going
to recover
maybe if you were to stay on the side of
the employee you know is there risk
maybe this is the core question is there
a risk that I might not be able to make
any money for my Equity if I let's say I
joined let's take a specific scenario I
joined and I had a good chunk of the
company and the the price the valuation
of the company is very high let's say it
was multiple billions of dollars now I
know the sector is down
and I'm one one and a half year into my
stock vest and I have these options
occurring
is there risk that I might not be able
to get any money for this even if the
company was to exit in a couple years
you know how do you think about this
drop in valuation when it comes to
existing comp
there is real risk that
um in in private company scenarios that
your common stock would be underwater
you know we talked sort of a little bit
at the outset that some of the outset at
some of the rights that preferred stock
has one of those is liquidation
preference which means
the investors the preferred stock gets
some amount of money before the common
stock get get anything
um in you know successful outcomes
um and you know the market we've had in
the last handful of years
you know it's quite common for the
common and the preferred to get the same
amount but in those downside scenarios
that you describe hey we thought we were
worth a couple billion now we're worth a
lot less and we sell the business
it's very possible that the preferred
stock get their money back and there's
not either anything or very little left
for
um you know for the for the common
stockholders
um the other piece that the risk that
you have is even if there is money left
for the comment you have an option that
was priced at the two billion dollar
valuation so it has
you know call it a price of three
dollars a share and the exit or the
current valuation and then the company
exits at this current valuation let's
say is it a dollar fifty
um so you have to make a decision is it
worthwhile to exercise for three dollars
to get
you know about 50 the answer is no
um and there's probably lots of examples
where it's a little closer or you know
you're exercising and you just don't
know how the outcome is going to come
but you know it's a lot lower and so you
have kind of risk of
the preferred stock getting you know in
the summary would be the preferred stock
getting either you know all of the
proceeds or a majority or a super
majority of the proceeds leaving very
little for common or your common stock
just being at an exercise price or stock
options being in an exercise price
that's lower than than the current or
higher than the current valuation
how do you find out so I'm year and a
half in
and I worry about potentially the
investors taking the line share
or I worry that the company might not be
valued from the price that I was granted
even though there was quite a spread at
the time can I ask or do people respond
like to the financial teams like openly
discuss this with employees
yeah you know I think I think you can
ask I think that um
you know I think that there's I think it
would be a fair answer by a by the
executive team or the CEO to say look
you know we have because a lot of
companies that were valued very high
very highly over the last few years
raised lots and lots of money and so
they're not looking to raise money right
now they're not looking to sell because
valuations are down they're gonna you
know work on product work on sales and
customer success and and get to a place
when they exit and hope that the
valuation is different and so I think
some version of that answer is probably
what you'll receive in a lot of
companies but I think it's a fair ask of
you know hey where you know how do we
feel
you know our company is situated based
on valuations and amounts we've raised
and you know where we might go now
um I think those are I think those are
are fair questions the other piece that
um you know that your followers should
know is that those 409a valuations that
you talk about
um the way the and and like Linda said
the snappy name of 83b is also the same
reason you have a Snappy name of 409a
it's the Internal Revenue code section
but Internal Revenue code section 409a
says that those valuations on how you
price options
they're valid
um until some either something material
happens or 12 months and so even if
there's nothing material like no
financing no you know huge huge customer
thing
um no big acquisition that you did if
just nothing material happens you just
kind of doing ordinary course for the
course of that 12 months at that end of
that 12 months you'd have to go get a
new valuation
um and so that is a point of like oh
gosh you know it used to be you know
three dollars now it's a dollar fifty
um at which we're issuing options
I see so you're suggesting that look if
you wait this out and you just monitor
the 409a price
companies are essentially over time
going to make that accurate and that Pro
that process is not something the
company determines internally it's done
by a third party so you know this piece
of data will help you get a sense of
does the external and Auditors feel good
about your price and if it turns out
that you have a 409a price at five
dollars and the valuation came down at
25 cents
then you'd be worried that you'd have to
work a really long time before you even
have a dollar for your options is that
is that a fair thing do you think that
most companies would probably go through
uh repricing or 49a revalue repricing is
the wrong word but a 409a res valuation
this year
well yeah I think most companies that
are raised that are you know have been
around and are issuing options will have
to just by definition we'll get a new
409a you know in that in that 12-month
period
um you know and then you you cut over to
repricing which is a bit of a different
topic is would companies sort of adjust
their old options to the new price the
underwater options to that new price
um and I think that depends right the
example you gave five dollars to 25
cents I think most companies would see
that and say geez we're going to have a
revolt on our hands if the people at
five dollars see their new colleagues
getting options at 25 cents
um whether you see a mass Exodus or a
Revolt um so we should fix that you know
I think if the example were hey it was
five dollars and now the new price is
480. you'd say we're going to get back
above five dollars like you know
everyone relax
um and I think there's lots of there's
lots of stuff in between there that's I
think a little bit harder but we are
seeing companies in this market
repricing trying to give that benefit
pass along the new benefit of the lower
price to uh to their teams but you are
seeing that you'll probably consider to
continue to see it into next year
I guess I'd I'd also add to that
um that
there are some tax reasons why you
really can't continually reprice the
same option so usually you can do it
like once is all right and I only
mentioned that because if you are the
person who you know has the five dollar
strike price and now there's a 25 cent
you know fair market value to just like
you can relax a little bit because the
company probably wants to wait like if
they think the next valuation is going
to be 10 cents they'd prefer to reprice
it then right rather than just repricing
when you know they feel like they
haven't quite hit the bottom and a lot
of times those valuations are tied to
what the Market's doing overall
um wish we could know when that's going
to turn around a little hard to predict
but I do think companies tend to be a
little bit
um thoughtful in trying to wait to
reprice until they think they you know
have a pretty low 409a
that makes sense and I know this was a
detailed topic
um but uh one I just wanted to sort of
uh summarize where we ended up I mean
this is one of the more complicated area
and hopefully we just sort of you know
maybe we scratched the surface on a lot
of the common questions but between sort
of understanding the price and the
percentage of the company understanding
these gotchas around tax and early
exercise understanding these exit
windows and how to think about
potentially losing stock and what
choices you have if you find yourself in
that and then uh thinking through how
the stock may have fluctuated both
directions up and down and how that
might impact your compensation Anthony
mccusker Linda Galligan thank you thank
you so much for your for your help I
know that this is
um not legal advice but common questions
that I think all of our listeners may be
hitting at some point down the road and
so I appreciate your your uh you know
help today and and and and Clarity on
some of these really complicated topics
uh you know for folks that have
questions you know we want them to
submit to
um to the podcast but also uh you know
when people come to you with specific
challenges and there's so many specific
scenarios what Guidance Do you have as
to who should they talk to and how do
they find help and should they be
actually talking to Folks at these
important times
I think they should absolutely find
advisors right you can find lawyers you
can find us you can find other lawyers
that do a lot of this work
um you can find Accountants wealth
managers are usually pretty good at it
as well and if you're talking to an
accountant or wealth manager and you
need a lawyer they usually have them
within their Network that they can can
get to get to them but I think having
the answers and being armed with it you
know you were saying earlier when you go
into these negotiations knowing you know
having spoken to someone and know kind
of what you want and why it's important
Etc I think can be really helpful not
necessarily
using those people on as the front line
but having them be able to give you the
ammo that you need for what you're going
into those discussions I think is
helpful and we talk to people all the
time on those sorts of topics
well thank you again and uh we look
forward to seeing you on a subsequent
skip podcast yeah thanks for having us
yep really appreciate it