foreign
welcome to the skip podcast the podcast
dedicated to helping you get ahead in
your Tech Career I'm your host nickel
Singh Hall and today's episode I have
invited a good friend of mine named
shreyas Doshi many of you may have heard
of Shreya shreyas is kind of a guru in
the product management Community you can
see his writing on Twitter he and I met
many years ago as we were both kind of
navigating career together and recently
he's focusing on giving back to the
product management community and
building coursework and really trying to
scale up what it means to to be a
successful product manager and a
successful product management executive
a few months ago Australia's tweeted out
a node on how success in academics
doesn't actually lead to always success
in professional life I invited treas
to talk through career plateaus what
causes professionals to get stuck what
causes them to have success at one phase
of career and then get stalled in
another I think that his expertise and
his diversity of working in lots of
different environments have led to some
real insight here and I think it's very
appropriate for a lot of folks that are
listening that that are worried about
being stuck or maybe that are feeling a
little stuck and not progressing like
they used to so uh welcome shreyas
thanks for having me nikhil so I maybe
we'll just get right into it I think
that one of the things that I was struck
by when I was speaking with you is just
the density and richness of your like I
always say that careers are made by not
one Playbook but having many playbooks
so that you can take up every new
challenge is not a page out of a
previous Playbook but it's a blend of
all these different lessons that one's
learned and you've been a Yahoo and
Google Twitter and stripe for probably
some of the best known and most
impactful companies of Our Generation
and you've been in product management in
most of these organizations and you know
I just have to sort of say that
oftentimes we say product management
works like X
but I think in your experience I suspect
that you'll find them that flavored
quite differently any any broad
guidelines around how these companies
might Define product management
differently yeah perhaps they can start
with a stripe where I joined very early
in the product management
functions kind of Life at stripe that
was actually one of the things that
really excited me about the roll at
stripe
which is hey here you have an already
fairly successful company so I was
talking to them late 2015.
and so they already had a you know few
hundred employees at that time and they
did not famously have product managers
uh you know since the early days and um
they were just starting the product
management function there were a couple
of product managers that they had hired
and then they were talking to me and uh
I was really excited about this
observation of like here's an already
fairly successful company uh and uh now
they are gonna
experimenting with product management
that's the best way I could put it and
they were pretty upfront about it that
this was an experiment and I thought
what a wonderful opportunity uh to
really see if I really believe in
product management I'd been doing
product management for 10 plus years
already by that time it's very if I
really believe in the value of product
management it's such a great opportunity
to kind of figure out if product
management can add kind of singular
value at a company that has already been
fairly successful so that was why I
ended up you know one of the reasons why
I ended up taking the role at stripe
even though it was unconventional in
many different ways like I went from
being a you know a PM leader to going
back to IC when I took this trip role so
there were lots of kind of strange
things that some of my peers you know
rightly said hey are you sure you want
to do this and I was like no I want to
do this and then what happened was you
know over the next year or two
you know we were defining uh you know
the product managers there and the
engineering managers we were we were
trying to figure out what is the role of
product management uh at stripe uh and
there were actually a few attempts that
were made to kind of like write
documents of like this is what product
managers do etc etc uh and uh
unfortunately none of that kind of
really stuck because even you know one
and a half two years in people were
fairly confused but wait what what is it
that product management does here uh
because it's a very product focused
company already everybody cares about
the product Etc uh and so at some point
I said you know what like let me take a
stab at writing something about what the
role of product management is at stripe
now that I've been here a couple of
years I kind of have sufficient context
um and I ended up writing uh if I
remember correctly I ended up writing
just three sentences
and uh it turned out that that resonated
strongly uh with everybody and so for a
while that was the kind of you know
official kind of role description of
product management at stripe uh and the
if I can share like the first sentence
that I shared and this goes back to my
kind of strong conviction of what
product management truly is uh what I
said uh I'm paraphrasing is the role of
a product manager
um is to Define what product to build
and to orchestrate
actions across the organization to make
it successful
okay so that was the first sentence and
then since this was largely going to be
read by like analytical product managers
engineering managers Etc their very next
question is going to be well how do you
define success so of course I responded
to that in the next sentence so the
second sentence was uh success is
defined
by user adoption
and business value
right and since then I've extended the
definition to customer satisfaction user
adoption and business value right uh and
so you need to have some of those if not
all of those to say okay you know this
is successful uh and uh that was pretty
much it right like and
uh then I had an FAQ section of uh you
know you know what is the role of an
engineering manager in such a product
focused company and whatnot
um and uh there was this very important
recognition that I wanted to share and
this kind of like you know actually goes
back to my experiences at these other
companies as well such as Twitter Google
and Yahoo where a lot of the confusion
and even the friction around the role of
product management uh comes in when uh
people are expecting completely mutually
exclusive work which is like well that
work that's product manager's job and
that type of work is not the product
manager's job
and what I have observed you know over
the years uh you know in terms of sort
of
how to make product management and the
role work is that it needs to be the
most adaptive role
within a team
right for instance uh and this is
something I kind of wrote in the FAQs in
that PM role description at stripe is
there could be situations where you have
a product manager and an engineering
manager working together or a tech lead
working together on some product uh and
there could be situations where the
engineering manager is uniquely skilled
on some user insight
um maybe because they have experience as
a Founder in that space or whatever it
is right so in that case it is fine for
the engineering manager to take on some
of the uh you know user conversations or
to take on some of the go to market
conversations
right and similarly there might be cases
where a product manager is kind of
uniquely technical in a certain area and
maybe in this situation the there is no
engineering manager or there's a new
engineering manager it might very well
be that the product manager has to adapt
again and go a little deeper into the
technical weeds and Technical execution
than they ordinarily would do right so
so this I this point I think I only
realized this after like 10 plus years
of kind of observing product management
in many places but this point is I think
not clear uh to many people and so
people expect like no no this is the
boundaries within which I will work and
don't you do anything in here and you
know what I'm not gonna touch these
other things because that's your job and
that sort of approach and that trying to
put product management as a role in you
know in a spreadsheet with cells in
specific rules doesn't quite work in my
opinion um so so that's my overall kind
of perspective on from what I've seen it
with these various companies and what
I've seen works with you know good
product management
yeah maybe another framing that I use is
gaps in glue I think that oftentimes
where the glue function you know
everyone has the boxes in their org
chart and the lines in between the boxes
often come into product management and I
think your Insight is that sometimes
people own some of those lines they have
leadership around collaboration or they
own customer relationships or they may
have expertise and the Art of product
management is to sort of adapt and and
and pull back when needed and lean in
when when needed as well and it sounds
like what you're telling me is the the
way you're defining product management
sort of Applied across these different
companies that was sort of a consistent
theme that you saw in the function
curious around are there areas that
these companies did Define product
management very different certainly
maybe because of the industry or the
culture or perhaps the scale of the
product I think the big differences I
noticed were
Inseparable from the culture of those
companies and there were many big
differences in the manner in which
product management worked and product
managers operated
and so some interesting factors were
saved you know when I joined Google this
was I think 2008
product management had been around at
Google for a while by then but there was
still this view that hey we are in much
more engineering we are an engineering
company
and your role as a product manager is to
support engineering
in fact back then you know depending on
which part of the Google org you were in
it was often said that like everybody is
just here to support engineering and
that's your role
um and uh you know that meant a very
different way of approaching you know
the product manager's work uh versus say
Twitter which was uh a lot uh you know a
lot more PM driven right it was uh it
was
you know it was expected that PMS for
whatever reason the culture was such
that like PMS are going to drive
everything uh and sometimes it almost
felt like some of the other functions
there was lots of friction sometimes
between pm and other functions because
it was expected that like PM is the
driver and everybody else is kind of the
supporting function
um and that caused its own set of
problems because you know that's kind of
like in my opinion that's not how you go
about Building Product I saw you know
something similar at Yahoo as well uh
now I joined Yahoo you know during its
better days but still like you know it
was like around 2006 or so so again
product management had been around for a
while and there I saw it was even very
Stark where you know that part I said
where product manager's job is to define
the product to be built uh well at Yahoo
there were cases where uh you know some
engineering teams would not build what
it would seems like an obvious kind of
you know feature teacher or error
message or something because it wasn't
in the spec and so you would have these
conversations with folks of like yeah it
wasn't in the prde
but it's obvious that when the user
Encounters this error we need an error
message and the response used to be well
but the product manager should have
defined it right and so there wasn't
that kind of agency and that you know
user-centric view that many other
functions had
and stripe I think was the most
interesting because
um you know at stripe what ended up
happening is that being customer Centric
was just a core
value that was applied across all
functions um and being user-centric and
even being product Centric was applied
across all functions uh and so over
there I found that my job as a product
manager was uh the easiest in a way
because I did not have to like convince
people
um that oh you know the product is not
good enough we need to make it better in
fact I would hear that from Engineers
they would say you know what no no I
need like two more days because I feel
like this interaction is not you know
well thought out or these this
documentation is not great and we need
to make it great and so uh so that was
really fun for me as somebody who wants
to build really excellent products that
the entire fabric of the organization
and because of the culture and it
started with the founders the entire
fabric of the organization was kind of
you know pushing and like moving you
towards building uh you know the best
possible product that you can for your
customers
and and so I think a lot of these
differences in the manner in which
product management works uh are very
deeply rooted in the culture itself of
the company because again product
management is such a you know broad
function that works with so many other
functions that um you know both the
features and the bugs that come up are
often just features and bugs of the
culture itself I love that that's such a
great statement and I think that
with your depth of experience and
diversity of experience in this
important function product management
you know I think you have so much to
offer others one of the conversations
we've been having over the last half
dozen years is how do you scale yourself
and your knowledge you know how do you
give back
um and and there's only so many roles
that you can have full time and I think
that you know looking even at your
LinkedIn there's probably now I don't
know maybe a half dozen to a dozen
formal advisory rules that you've taken
on and and I think that a lot of our
listeners that are in this sort of act
two of career where they're leaders
they've had a lot of success they you
know want to do more than maybe their
day job they're asking this question
around you know I I probably have
knowledge that others would use I'd love
to be an advisor but how does one go
about doing that how do what kind of
what kind of talent are they looking for
companies why would they need me how do
I plug in you know these questions and
I'm sure you face those questions half
dozen years ago you know how did you
plug in to becoming an advisor and
what's that relationship like and why
has that been an investment for you yeah
it's been such a such a fun Journey for
me in this kind of uh this chapter of my
career where I have at this point uh you
know advised meaningfully advised more
than a hundred companies a lot of most
of the advising work I do is uh informal
advising
um and and then there are some kind of
formal advising Arrangements that I also
have where I work with Founders on a
longer term basis whether it's six
months 12 months or even longer
sometimes and a couple of observations
from my own Journey
um you know I started uh getting this I
did not plan for this necessarily but I
started getting into this because uh you
know while I was at stripe there were
companies reaching out to me for you
know leadership opportunities as they do
I'm sure to uh you know many of your
listeners as well
and you know for whatever reason if the
timing wasn't right
um uh you know my the previous mode I
took earlier in my career was just to
say well the timing isn't right so you
know let's talk again later uh but by
this time I felt like I had both enough
context and interest
uh to still engage in a conversation
with the founder not so much about not
in the interview kind of setting but
more in the setting of like
uh uh okay so you know you presumably
reached out to me because you heard good
things from somebody else uh I am not
looking for an operating role right now
but
um if you want to chat I'm happy to chat
and I'm happy to you know provide my
perspective on whatever it is that
you're trying to do so that's really how
it started and I had I don't know dozens
of such conversations uh over my last
you know two or three years at stripe uh
and and frankly these things don't even
take that much time because like on
average it's just like one conversation
a month or something like that so like
anybody can manage that and the
interesting that interesting thing that
happened nikhil is um I'll share like
what happened at my end and then at the
Founder's end so at my end like again I
had not planned any of this so I didn't
know what to expect but I found myself
extremely invigorated at the end of
those conversations and by the way these
were like intense conversations because
like you know there's a very important
problem or problems that the founder is
kind of sharing with me uh and uh you
know usually even if he had one hour
we'd go one and a half hours sometimes
two hours
um
and even at the end of it I felt like
like a lot of energy
so notice that and said okay that's
interesting then on the other side
sometimes I would ask the founders so
like was this useful we just went
through often it was the topic used to
be like well I'm looking my VCS are
telling me that I need a head of product
a CPO VP product whatever uh what should
I do and that's that's why they reached
out to me to kind of like try to hire me
um and so I say like I kind of like hear
them out hear out what they're trying to
do the strategy the challenges Etc their
own kind of skills uh and uh their own
kind of superpowers and then I would
share my perspective
um on things
um and so after that I would ask them
like so was this useful and often times
I heard some version of the following I
heard something like well you know you
were one of the four or five people uh
that uh you know I reached out to uh to
kind of or talk to to understand this
issue
um and uh you know uh four of them said
the same thing right uh and what you
said you were the fifth one and you what
you said was something entirely
different
um and your perspective resonated
so I'm gonna try it out because
sometimes say if it's the problem of it
was not always the case but say it's the
problem of okay I want to hire a head of
product right uh the first question they
ask is like what should I look for and
who do you know right and so I would
often tell them like that's the wrong
place to start
right it's like what are you really
trying to do Etc like you know you go
through that kind of like you know
intense inquiry of like what are we
trying to really do here uh
so as so that we can set this person up
for success and sometimes the conclusion
that the founder would reach is actually
I should not be hiring a CPO right now
you know I should go hire a kind of like
um you know um a mid-level experience PM
uh and I should continue to do a lot of
the product work and I should delegate
certain aspects so that kind of this is
a very important decision right like and
so like helping Founders through this
decision uh which like again like my job
is not to tell them what to do my job is
to help them figure out what the right
thing is to do for them uh I heard often
enough that like oh you know your
perspective was different and it
resonated
and so that's when I started thinking
well if I am deriving so much energy
from this
and if my perspective is uniquely useful
then maybe there's something here right
so that's that was kind of like the
Genesis of this uh and then over time I
just you know I was just like I kept and
when I after I left Skype I kept myself
open to yes if you know I'm happy to
talk to energetic smart talented
Founders uh with no kind of expectation
of any kind of formal advisory
relationship
um and sometimes I would get on one or
two calls sometimes three calls with
them
and in some of those cases they would
say you know what I want to continue
this I want to continue this and that's
how you know some of my formal advisory
work started was merely as a result of
Founders wanting to continue that and my
desire to want to continue working with
the founder because I thought they were
great yeah so hopeful there's so many
nuggets in there I mean what I'm hearing
is
there is always opportunities because
you're always getting unsolicited
inbound
and so you started paying attention to
that and when you have those early
conversations
You observe two things one was how what
was your energy levels after the
conversation concluded and you notice
that this was something that excited you
which then meant you were naturally
gravitated to prioritize and invest more
and then the second is you got good
feedback that you were saying something
that you were clearly authentic and
passionate about and you had Insight
that others had had really valued and
the combination was enough to lean in
but you didn't start with i this 2023 I
want five advisory roles and I'm going
to run a process to find those you
simply said can I help companies and
enjoy it along the way and if one thing
led to another and the company started
to attach there was naturally some
organic relationship that would follow
because you wouldn't want it to stop on
either side but if it turned out that
after a couple of conversations it was
enough that you either didn't have
enough follow through or you had solve
the Tactical problem well then it
wouldn't make sense to be an advisor
anyway and you part as friends and
perhaps that leads to another future
advisory role and so that looseness
approach but opening yourself up to
opportunity is what I'm hearing and I
think it's great advice for folks that
do find themselves this year maybe being
a bit more constrained in their day job
maybe because the role of shrunk or the
company is not growing as much but
there's so much activity in the industry
and there's so much inbound take
advantage of that to see if you can
spark some desire and find some unique
insights so I I really love that point I
also noticed that I just got better as I
had these conversations right like you
know the first 10 advisory conversations
I had uh you know I wasn't as effective
and as useful as the last 10 I've had
and that this kind of seems obvious of
you know because you if you do something
long enough you'd improve but my point
is that
perhaps you know early on I wasn't quite
yet even ready to kind of like start an
advising business right like I just
noticed the quality of questions I ask
now is so much better than the quality
of questions I used to ask uh you know
the first 10 or 20 or 50 times I did it
and ultimately you know as an advisor
uh there is Insight obviously and I
share insight
but the greatest value I can add is
through the questions I ask you
and I will now often ask you just like
three to four questions
and in many cases it like just the
questions and the prompts and the
follow-up questions and the discussion
you as a Founder will end up within like
and I've heard this often
um you know that like oh I've been
working on this for three or four years
I spent an hour with you and I ended up
with a completely different perspective
on this thing I've been working on the
last three four years and I look back
and say like hey what did I do like I
actually didn't do much other than just
ask you the right three four five six
questions uh and prompted you and nudged
you and then you reached the the
whatever conclusion that you were
looking for on your own right like I did
like I don't know about 50 different
domains that I can give you a domain
specific expertise uh it's for you to
figure that out but it's the quality of
the questions and so I do think it's
important to understand that if we start
approaching something from like I want
to you know start a business or I want
to start a practice here
um we might actually lose out on that
kind of like necessary uh you know early
stage uh experience that we need such
that we can actually build a very
sustainable and a differentiated
practice in these areas and I think
there's questions are one of your many
superpowers and I think I would say
concise wisdom is maybe another way and
you truly have embodied uh art when I
look at your Twitter uh content because
I've always struggled with communicating
the concepts and the Frameworks that
I've been building around leadership or
career product management into short
form content and you've managed to do it
in that 140 characters I think that for
those of you that are listening that
aren't following stress on his Twitter
feed you're really missing out because
you get these questions you get these
insights you get these clear
where he's different from the the tribe
that those those insights have been
incredibly helpful to me to just
sometimes just have vocabulary to frame
something that's sort of ruminating but
to have the words and to name it is so
powerful and the combination of that and
your small group super follower
Community I think has been really
insightful but I think you're on to
something new lately is what I
understand you're you're I think maybe
you're you're a teacher by trade but
you've been scaling up not only your
content but you're you're teaching and I
I don't know much about it but I read
these highest Roi that I've ever spent
on a weekend accelerated my product
management career so tell me a little
bit more about what you've been up to
and and are are you effectively now
teaching a course or how does that work
yeah that's been
um a really fun experience and I just
started doing this about four or four or
five months ago
um and the way it started uh is uh as I
was kind of you know after I let's left
stripe this was in May 2021
um uh I decided for the first time in my
career to take some time to figure out
what's next I talked to a lot of uh
people uh I think guys you and I spoke
as well about sort of like what's next
and how to think about all of that uh
and
I had just kept an open mind that like
oh you know I'm gonna start writing a
little more because now I have more time
and I have now a followership on Twitter
and Linkedin uh and then I was I'm gonna
continue doing more of my advising work
uh you know which kind of again started
while I was still at stripe uh so I'm
gonna start uh you know doing more of
those things
and as those started working very well
and gave me tremendous satisfaction one
of the one of the things I noticed is
there was something missing so like my
advising work was covering for the
one-on-one deep
uh impact uh really well right like
whether it's like with one founder or a
couple of Founders or with Executives at
the company uh that was just deeply
satisfying it was like going deep and
having context uh over a long period of
time and um uh a high degree of impact
to one company uh whichever one I'm
advising right now okay so that was
taken care of the one-on-one then I had
the writing which by that time was now
reaching hundreds of thousands of people
um so so I had the one to hundreds of
thousands also covered now over there
obviously
um you know the impact is not going to
be as deep with all the hundred thousand
plus uh people uh but it's going to be
very Broad
uh and I started sensing that there was
something missing which was
um you know what about the one is 200
and one is to 1000 impact and the way it
kind of manifested was I was getting a
lot of requests for coaching
yeah and I did not want to kind of start
a conventional coaching practice uh
because I was already already doing the
Deep advising work and I felt like you
know if I also start doing coaching then
you know I'm just not going to be as
effective with the Deep kind of strategy
go to market culture advising that I do
with startups so uh so that's when the
idea of courses came about which is what
if I can do coaching uh but through
courses
right and and so the manner in which now
I've structured I have one course out
right now which is about managing your
product career uh where I'm sharing sort
of you know 20 plus years of my own
learning but also learnings from people
I know
um and uh also I interview uh you know
product leaders and uh you know
executive recruiters you and I had a
conversation about that as well for my
course
um and I kind of like pack all of those
insights into a weekend that is focused
uh on sort of the end-to-end view of
your career right from you know what
sort of path do you want to create uh
how do you build competence uh to how do
you find the right companies because
it's so important like a lot of our
career is like really dependent on you
know identifying the right company how
to get hired uh how to negotiate a comp
and like how to evaluate offers that's
another area where I've seen people make
so many mistakes where you did
everything right up to this point but
now you know you had three offers
and you ended up picking the wrong one
right like in hindsight the wrong one so
is there a way to figure out like which
is the right offer for you in a way that
you minimize mistakes uh to sort of like
how do you then get recognition within
your company how do you grow within your
company how do you get promoted how do
you sort of you know plan for the right
kind of ratings for your work that sort
of stuff uh and then most recently I
also added a section around how to deal
with the tech jobs downturn that we are
kind of starting to see here
um so anyway so uh you know I've crafted
that uh 800 people uh have already kind
of gone through this and uh what I
realized is my hypothesis was that uh if
I structure this in a unique way and if
I treat this course like I would treat a
product and kind of basically just like
product manage it uh such that I can
have the right kind of effect on my
users in this case my students
um then that would be a you know
wonderful kind of experience and
hopefully useful for students and that
hypothesis I would say has been proven
at this point because
um you know a lot of people have told me
that like it just substantially changed
the way they have they were thinking
about their career you know they were
just thinking kind of one track now they
understand that for them there are
actually various different tracks
possible we go through a lot of
exercises along the way as well uh for
people to figure some of that out and
then there's a community and various
other resources available
um so uh yeah all in all I'm super
excited because now I'm able to fill
this kind of 1 to 100 and one to one
thousand Gap and kind of effectively
what I'm trying to do nikhil is not not
necessarily teach a course but coach a
course right like it should feel like
you are actually getting coaching from
me because I just cannot scale to
one-on-one coaching or even one two
three coaching anymore uh and so as part
of that I have these extensive AMA
sessions where I'll kind of answer your
questions and so on uh and then lastly
people who take my course I want them to
continue learning after they're done
with the course as well I don't just
want it to be like oh that was a fun
weekend I learned a lot of new things
new Frameworks met a bunch of people now
I'm just gonna go back to doing what I
was doing to solve that problem I've
just recently last week launched
something called Product club and so
people who take my course are eligible
to join product Club where they have an
ongoing Channel with me there's a
dedicated slack of everybody who took my
course so now it's already 400 plus
people who have joined product club and
are on this slack and over there uh I
will be doing monthly events with them
where again it's kind of this AMA style
I'll share what's top of mind and kind
of again like in the spirit of coaching
and group coaching kind of create a
channel where I can reach you and I can
address you know the questions and the
challenges you're facing right now not
just you know a month ago when you took
my course so I'm super excited about
that and now spending you know a pretty
large amount of my time just focused on
this well it's so appropriate for the
listeners because many many of these
listeners are thinking through their
Tech careers and a lot of the questions
you asked around decisions compensation
thinking long term understanding how to
navigate internal and external climates
and downturns are all kind of dead on
and so for those of you that that are
thinking through you know those those
questions you know burning a weekend to
listen and learn from not only trust but
from others that are going through the
same problem I think is is a tremendous
value add and what's also exciting to me
stress is to hear that that's one that's
only one class that you have in mind
that there's others potentially coming
and that there may be more more ways to
sort of scale and product manage your
wisdom which which I think is a great
great way to frame it you know along
those lines and along this sort of maybe
pivoting a little bit to a tweet that
caught my eye in July
that had you know a lot of the
characteristics of this ability to very
concisely put language around something
that I had been observing for decades
you know and for decades you know
looking at people that have had
tremendous success and strength in
academics you know you and I both are
surrounded with folks in our industry
who you know were at the top of their
class from his prestigious University or
Seto universities and had all the
makings of just you know success in
every way shape or form and what you
find is they don't necessarily struggle
on a consistent basis but they're just
inconsistent
there's almost no connection with their
success 15 years later and their
academic success some did incredibly
well
some never found their footing and some
were in between and similarly if you
look at some of the most successful
entrepreneurs Executives and leaders and
those that have Elite careers many of
them didn't have tremendous academic
backgrounds and so I've always kind of
ruminated on this especially as you talk
to parents who have kids that are so
dedicated to trying to get their son or
their daughter you know the best
education the best school and that whole
kind of rigmarole and you start thinking
through well is this really that
connected and I think you wrote this
this really powerful
the statement which is what we learn in
school must be unlearned in business and
in life
and I just I thought that was so
powerful and I I'd love to just to get
your perspective maybe what what
possessed you to to write this note and
maybe we can go through some of the
areas uh you know in this discussion but
where did this come from yeah quite
similar to you nickel I
had been working with uh you know highly
accomplished brilliant brilliant people
um with wonderful wonderful resumes in
some cases uh you know as peers in other
cases is you know managers and in other
cases as uh you know people who were on
my team
um and
I started noticing and kind of asked
myself the question of like well here
you have somebody
who just clearly has all the talent
uh that you need to be highly successful
in whatever it is that they're doing
and yet
the impact isn't there
and not only that
and this was especially true in cases
where I was coaching mentoring or
managing somebody because we would have
you know deep conversations about this
stuff
um
and yet you know both the impact isn't
sort of in proportion to the talent and
the potential but also
they were just deeply frustrated with
how things were going
and uh and they couldn't quite figure
out why things were not going the way
they wanted them to go
so that was
that I I saw that often enough across
companies and across teams and whatnot
and I started thinking about why this
might be occurring so consistently
um
and that's when I realized that a lot of
now not entirely but a lot of um why
that is happening is because
the
the things that you learn you know in
your formative years
um they work really well for you in
those years in the academic context
and then you know as many of us do we
then tell ourselves a story that like if
I do X
I get y right
and then we bring that story Into the
workplace and actually early on perhaps
at Junior levels it does work
right at entry level uh it does work
right because you have a boss and they
will tell you like you need to do this
and you go do that and uh and it's very
structured and and you're given all the
right resources uh there is no ambiguity
uh and it works and so you say wow okay
this works so let me do more of it right
and then the organization recognizes you
and now you are at the next level or the
level after that and then all of a
sudden it stops working and that's what
causes that frustration which is like by
this time now I've had you know whatever
if 15 years 18 years of a certain
approach that has worked wonderfully
fully well for me look at my resume
and now it's not working right and
oftentimes what would happen nikhil is
uh the first blame would go to the
environment which is like oh this
organization or this company you know
it's screwed up in all sorts of
different ways and if only we could
align and create the right kind of
optimal environment uh then you will see
how much impact I can have right and so
so you know and I've done so many deep
kind of coaching conversations with
folks on my team and others on this
topic and that's what kind of led me to
uh you know write this piece about the
things we learned early on that work for
us that then sometimes we have to
unlearn later on this sort of career
plateauing or frustration coming up in
mid-career I think is what really
connected me to the to the material I
think concretely you mentioned that you
know when you're in school you need to
be good at following rules and following
structures and yet in business breaking
rules leads to outsized returns and
you're often expected to create your own
structure and we've talked about on this
uh podcast how oftentimes managers are
actually quite weak at creating the
structure and letting you color within
the lines particularly as you become a
leader and feedback is extremely clear
in school you get tests and grades and
the goals are very obvious you get
graduation and you get to the next level
but in business feedback is actually
quite rare and good feedback in
particular and that there's such small
differences between winning and losing
it's not so concrete of a versus B
versus C and timelines are often very
short they're measured in a quarter or a
semester or a year and then there's a
clear ending you know I'm going to
graduate at the end of this year go to
school college but careers are you know
20 jobs 15 jobs 12 jobs for many people
and the best rewards often take many
many years where you see all these
examples of we worked for six seven
years before we found you know
confidence or skill or or product Market
fit so things are relatively short-lived
so these are the things when it you know
comes to these structural rules would
would you say that now when you apply it
to managers that might be in this mode
where they're feeling stuck are they
struggling with this and maybe a a
better way to ask the question is
what is your coaching advice for folks
that are in this sort of rural feedback
timeline it wasn't in the PRD so I'm not
going to do it so they're very much
sticking to the lines but we both know
that leadership is often breaking lines
creating your own how do you cook
someone to see that and change that
behavior the general theme I see often
is
this idea of
you know well
I need uh so this is like a you know a
leader
um whether it's a you know first level
manager or perhaps even uh you know
director VP level person
um who says well
I can
I'm responsible for this goal or I'm
responsible for this metric
or whatever
uh and the challenge is that uh you know
the rest of the organization there isn't
Clarity isn't there isn't Clarity on how
this fits in and there isn't Clarity uh
on you know just how much of a priority
this is ETC
um and and that often is a team that uh
you know I have um dealt with as a
manager or in some cases as I was
coaching folks
um
and my Approach is to help them realize
through a series of questions
that effectively this is why you have
this role
right is like you know your number one
job is to create Clarity in an
environment
that is extremely noisy is extremely
complex
and is by definition ambiguous
right so so your job shifts from
you know just kind of through sheer will
and sheer discipline just getting things
done because that's what you gets you
promoted early on that's what gets you
good grades right like there's a rubric
uh you know the the teacher or the
professor publishes the rubric and then
you follow the rubric and voila you know
you get the a grade
um
and
that transition that uh you know the
folks who are kind of sometimes feeling
stuck uh that they need to go through is
that oh now it is my job to create that
clarity
right like and there is never going to
be an environment uh you know from this
point forward uh if I'm gonna be
operating at these levels where the
clarity is ready made
right uh and so so then once they
realize it and look I cannot tell you
that directly because if I tell you that
it's not going to work you have to
realize it yourself and that requires
you know a series of questions uh
introspection and all of that but once
you reach that point
now we are having a very different
conversation right we are having the
conversation of
okay so so now how much uh you know how
much responsibility are you going to
take
to tell uh the CEO that this is what
needs to happen right how much
responsibility are you going to take to
tell your cross-functional peers uh that
here's where we are headed uh and and
then then we can start talking about
okay now how do you communicate it what
are the tactics and the techniques and
the process that you use to communicate
all of this uh across your organization
in a way that the efforts are cohesive
and and people are motivated and all of
that right uh and so oftentimes you know
people kind of jump directly to this
which is like oftentimes you know a lot
of times what happens is people
people encounter a problem and they jump
directly to how do I do this right
um whereas like sometimes I have to help
them understand like first let's
understand what is your role and what it
is that even needs to be done and when
we can figure that out and it's the
correct thing the how actually writes
itself and I can help you with that but
you know we can get to the how but we
first need to understand what your role
is in all of this and folks who cannot
make this transition
uh they kind of feel stuck in their
careers and oftentimes they're uh you
know the executive team uh the CEO is
also frustrated that here you have
somebody with great potential uh but
they are not quite you know creating the
clarity I need uh they're not quite
creating the clarity for their area uh
that will move things forward
uh and uh you know I also see this
tendency nickel sometimes in folks who
kind of spent a lot of time in um you
know very large companies because in
very large companies even if you are at
kind of senior director level and what
not sometimes uh you are handed uh sort
of like you know a recipe a roadmap in a
specific set of things to do if you've
been doing that for many many years and
now you're going to a startup uh you're
now all of a sudden going to be confused
because there isn't that you know clear
chatter that you've been given and I saw
this quite a bit you know at stripe and
also in places you know where I've kind
of advised Executives have gone to
startups from large company environments
where they often felt like well but we
don't know like you know hey it's so
screwed up like the we don't have a
clear strategy or we don't have uh you
know there's all this kind of open
questions that are not answered and then
I have to help them understand yeah it's
your job to create that Clarity to help
answer those questions such that you can
have that cohesive execution
the things that come to mind when I hear
you describe this is mindset and courage
and what I mean by that is those that
succeed in coming to the conclusion that
you pose through questions that hey what
got me here isn't necessarily what gets
me there
I need to unlearn
maybe the things that I would even
suggest are my superpowers or my
professional identity here and maybe in
the case of school my academic identity
and I needed to come in with The
Beginner's mindset that there must be
maybe a different way of solving the
problem that I'm not a victim to the
ambiguity but that I own the ambiguity
it becomes my problem not the
environment or the company or the CEO or
the management team's problem I am part
of it
but I think that even having said that
that's a lot of energy
that is not an easy task there's a
reason why people don't take on more
responsibility or go from these late
stage to early stage environment because
it does take courage you know it takes
this interest in starting again and
going through the process of relearning
and maybe even unlearning and I'm
curious as to how you think about this
mindset and shift and this energy and
courage required would you agree that
that's important and perhaps how do you
ensure that people have it when they're
faced with this challenge
I like the characterization of a lot of
these attributes in terms of uh this
term I encountered I think Eric
Weinstein uh coined it called high
agency
and it is essentially the idea that like
some people are just kind of high agency
people
and they
just take on problems they with full
ownership
and they furthermore apply a high degree
of creativity to solving the those
problems
and along the way they show
a high
degree of resilience and confidence
um
as they encounter challenges which are
inevitable in complex you know
high-stakes environments uh and so that
combination of uh you know resilience
and confidence and ownership mindset
and
uh the creativity
and then lastly influential
communication
so those five things when we put
together you get this you know idea of
high agency
um and
I think that is again one of the key
things I've noticed that um
you know once you go from you know doing
a job really well to needing to lead a
job that needs to be done well to
needing to lead uh many many jobs that
need to be done really well
that a high agency is the big
differentiator between sort of like you
know good and ordinary and good careers
and really great careers and great
impact
um and I do believe that this is
something that uh can be cultivated
um you know now any kind of world-class
levels of any of these things a lot of
it is kind of you know inborn like sort
of traits Etc but just because
you know uh certain things like some
people are just naturally great
communicators right like they did not
have to do much it seems effortless
right but just because somebody is a 10
out of 10 Communicator just because they
have some natural gifts uh that doesn't
mean if I am a six that I shouldn't
strive to be a seven eight or a ninth
right uh and and so so I do think that
kind of uh that that's where some of
that mindset comes in as well which is
like uh look oftentimes um you know I I
share some of this in my course as well
uh that you know one of my observations
is that oftentimes especially as kind of
you know leaders most of our problems
are actually in many ways messaging
problems
right uh and because we need to be able
to we know what the right thing is uh
and however we got to that conclusion we
know what the right thing is but there
are so many challenges along the way to
kind of message it in a way that
resonates with everybody that aligns
everybody that excites everybody right
so it's a messaging problem so so so
how do you deal with it right like if
you're just focused on the content if
you told yourself the story of like no
no just the content everybody should
figure this out on their own like why
like why can't they figure this out like
are they idiots right like I see a lot
of that kind of you know approach and
you know thought processes uh and and
what you have to unlearn here is
um now look like this is where you need
to exercise the skill of influential
communication which again one of the
attributes of high agency and you know
if a message doesn't resonate one way
you gotta try it another way and in fact
you know at higher levels your job is to
just be a repeater right like you're
just repeating the same thing over and
over again in different ways such that
it will resonate with people
um
and and you know like for instance one
like very tactical example I'll use is
some leaders will say you know
oh I like sending written updates right
so I will send emails and I expect the
team to kind of you know I'll put my
thoughts in I'll put a lot of care into
it and and I expect the team to read it
and kind of understand I have a large
org so I expect them to understand what
needs to happen and then it should
happen right well it turns out if you
cannot just think a little critically
about this say you have an organization
of uh 1000 people 500 people even 100
people or even 30 people it turns out
that some people
naturally resonate with the written word
format right they love they devour your
emails or your Google Docs or whatever
uh and uh and it works for them and they
get the message at the same time there
are some other people for whom this kind
of verbal communication is the thing
that's going to resonate right so you'll
have to go up there and this is
something I had to learn as a leader as
well you have to go up there and at all
hands or team meetings or whatever you
need to make appearance in every single
team meeting within your org and talk
about this because that's what they are
going to really resonate with while the
email people are like well this meeting
could have been an email right and and
then in some cases some people are
highly Visual and so if there is a
vision you want to convey you might even
have to create some you know inspiring
prototypes and inspiring mock-ups you
know and and even though it's very early
stage you might even have to do that
because the words you know for some
people just reading the words is not
enough right like they need to see how
it's going to manifest and the the
moment they see that manifestation they
are like aha now I get it right I did
not get the email I did not get the
Google Doc I did not even get the
All Hands where we talked about this
but I got
the marks right or I got the customer
story right so so this is an example of
something where I find that like people
need to kind of you know change the
mindset of like now it's no longer about
you know what medium you prefer what is
your superpower it's about figuring out
what works for your organization and
then influentially communicating uh in
variety of different ways so this is
just one example but this is the kind of
thing um that takes some leaders a
really long time to sort of like you
know come to terms with that's that last
thing that I think is probably the other
piece that I'd want us to
emphasize for those listeners that are
feeling like they're plateauing they're
hearing shreyas talk about you need to
take a bit of a step backward assess the
needs of the organization take some
agency take some ownership and then re
re rethink your style rethink your
approach
the fact is that these things take time
they are not going to happen overnight
and why that's an important statement is
in the past you might have been promoted
every year you might have been a
straight A student you might have found
things come easy because the way that
you think is the same way that others
expect but now your organization's
larger the tools need to be more diverse
you have to own the ambiguity as opposed
to be shielded from it and so it's not
unusual for uh for me to see people who
have had very fast starts to careers
quote unquote hit a bit of a wall when
they get to management when they get to
even executive and that hit the wall
might be them just working through the
pain of relearning themselves relearning
their technique
and then they unstick
and then they start moving quickly
forward and so you have to have that
courage that patience and that optimism
that you maybe are a six today but when
you're an eight things will unlock but I
think if your mindset is this I must be
doing something wrong because I or the
environment must be wrong because I was
moving so quick in the past perhaps it's
exactly the opposite
as we conclude
I'd love to just maybe get a last few
words from you on any additional advice
you have for those that are listening
that really feel like they're stuck a
bit and that they're hearing your words
they're understanding they need to go
through this but any Beyond maybe taking
your class any other ideas that might
help them as they approach this sort of
unsticking themselves from this sort of
spot they're in the main thing I I would
suggest that folks consider
is
that
there are many more options available to
you than meets the eye
because I think we we do have I see
especially in highly
High Talent
fast-paced organizations which naturally
then like sort of you know there are
many ambitious people in these companies
um
and a lot of times nikhil I see
um people are just
focused on the conventional path which
is like okay I'm at L 8
the next is L9
and uh
the one after that uh is going to take
me two more years or three more years
and that is a viable path for sure
but uh
it is not for everybody
and I think people there is this kind of
some almost
stigma around
you know oh if you are ambitious but if
you are not VP by this time that means
you know something's wrong with you or
you failed or whatever
um and it turns out that like that's why
there are many people who reach the VP
stage or the CPO stage and they kind of
hate it because that was not the
authentic path for them
right or maybe they should have explored
a few other things before uh you know
they they tried to go for the CPO role
or whatever that is
and so I think a lot of people just kind
of miss that and it's almost it's
sometimes I feel like it's it's like uh
you know a video game which is like okay
the point of a video game is to get to
the next level and if I do these things
I get to the next level but it's kind of
like you need to understand what awaits
you at that next level uh you need to
understand if um you know you have the
right skill set uh you know just because
you know just because the next level
exists uh doesn't mean that that has to
be your only goal even if say you have
the right skill set uh maybe it's not
the right time in your life right uh and
uh maybe it's uh you know maybe maybe
you would find more fulfillment uh in
just staying at the level you are for
the next three four years but trying
different things right developing
different skills
um
so so that's just like one aspect of the
general point that uh I like uh folks to
really think hard about is like just you
know be rigorous about your career
decisions and as product people uh you
know many of us pride ourselves on uh
you know making really great uh product
decisions whether that's via marrying
data with anecdotes Etc but we pride
ourselves in making really great product
decisions well like you we should be
applying uh that same degree of rigor
that same degree of thoughtfulness to
the most to what I would argue is the
most important product which is
ourselves right uh and and
you know I'll share a concrete example
sometimes for instance here's how this
manifest where you know folks feel like
they have the right idea but they don't
and then they make inauthentic choices
so oftentimes I'll talk to somebody
who's super ambitious say they are a big
tech company like Google or something
else and you know they'll they they want
to figure out what net what's next for
your career uh
naturally the topic uh sometimes the
topic that they bring up is like well
actually
you know three years from now four years
from now or a couple of years from now I
expect to that I I should be founding a
company
uh I want to do a venture back startup
that's something I've always dreamed of
and I I think I'm Gonna Be Ready
life-wise Etc to do that couple of years
from now okay great uh so then we start
talking about okay what's next
and so then they'd say okay in order to
do that
the next thing I need to do is I need to
uh you know become VP
okay and so I asked them like okay help
me understand you know what your
rationale is and it often boils down to
like two things uh one of two things uh
one is oh is that way I'll manage larger
scope I'll know how to manage uh I'll
I'll maybe own p l I'll know how to
manage the company manage people manage
organizations and that's a useful skill
obviously as a Founder uh so that's one
version I hear and the other version I
hear is oh it might give me more
credibility with VCS and whatever else
that's roughly the two reasons I hear
and then like I have to point out that
like you know your number one job as a
founder of an early stage venture-backed
startup is not to manage an org
right it's to build a product that
resonates highly such that you reach
this kind of product Market fit
right because without that your old
building skills or your old management
skills are kind of useless
right and let's face the reality that
most startups never make it to that
point
right so just logically if we were to
really deeply logically think about this
in like rationally do it without putting
emotion into it and without having kind
of LinkedIn and we uh like just if we
look at it rationally it makes more
sense for you
for over the next two years to figure
out what skills you need to develop what
product skills you need to develop right
uh what design skills you need to
develop or what domain skills you need
to develop such that you maximize the
odds that your startup hits product
Market fit right nothing else matters
until then and if there are gaps there
let's go fill that Gap right and that
might actually mean not going for that
VP promotion because as a VP you're not
going to get to exercise a lot of these
skills that we are talking about because
there are other people in your team that
are going to be doing that right it
might even make sense depending on your
situation that you go back to an IC role
right for an early stage kind of
initiative that you take forward uh or
it might even mean something else where
you take a role which is not all that
time consuming so that you can kind of
incubate your new Venture
um you know on weekends or in uh in
evenings uh as you kind of embark on
this right so again there is no one
right answer for everybody but this is
an example where I think most people
assume that like oh this thing is the
right answer for me but uh you know
we've just got to think critically about
it and we've got a like my I would
encourage you to kind of a lot of these
things happen because the ego comes into
play right like we want that VP title
and then we rationalize that desire with
through some logical explanation and so
we we really have to kind of like you
know look at that a little more closely
and objectively and you know the ego is
there but like try to at least you know
see that the ego is playing a role here
have the courage to find your own path
recognize that the path that a company's
laid out isn't necessarily the career
path for you and and I think embrace the
opposite of conventional wisdom whether
it's strength and academics don't lead
to professional success or getting that
VP maybe the exact opposite thing to
become a great founder or perhaps even
to drive fulfillment and career
maximization and I think that a lot of
the courage is to find your own path to
reinvent oneself to take that step
backwards and and have that beginner
mindset for your own career which is you
know ultimately the most important
product so trans thank you for joining
me today uh for those people that are
listening that want to get in touch with
you what's the best way to do that well
obviously put it in our show notes a few
critical links but how do you want
people to find you so I'm on Twitter and
on LinkedIn so feel free to follow me on
either of those platforms feel free to
you know message me my DMs are open I
cannot answer every single DM but I try
so I would love to continue this
dialogue well thank you for joining and
uh and and we are more than excited to
have you back for a future episode
thanks for having me nikhil this is a
blast